# [InstCombine][FuncAttrs] InstCombine breaks `initializes` attribute

**Author:** dtcxzyw
**URL:** https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/133059
**Status:** Closed
**Labels:** miscompilation, llvm:instcombine, miscompilation:undef, generated by fuzzer
**Closed Date:** 2025-04-08T07:30:45Z

## Body

Reproducer: https://alive2.llvm.org/ce/z/rx6rJk
```
; bin/opt -passes=instcombine test.ll -S

define fastcc void @src(ptr initializes((0, 48)) %0) {
  %2 = alloca [24 x i8], align 8
  store i8 0, ptr %0, align 16
  %3 = getelementptr i8, ptr %0, i64 1
  store i8 0, ptr %3, align 1
  %4 = getelementptr i8, ptr %0, i64 2
  store i16 0, ptr %4, align 2
  %5 = getelementptr i8, ptr %0, i64 4
  store i32 0, ptr %5, align 4
  %6 = getelementptr i8, ptr %0, i64 8
  store i16 0, ptr %6, align 8
  %7 = getelementptr i8, ptr %0, i64 10
  store i16 0, ptr %7, align 2
  %8 = getelementptr i8, ptr %0, i64 12
  store i32 0, ptr %8, align 4
  %9 = getelementptr i8, ptr %0, i64 16
  store double 0.000000e+00, ptr %9, align 16
  %10 = getelementptr i8, ptr %0, i64 24
  call void @llvm.memcpy.p0.p0.i64(ptr %10, ptr %2, i64 24, i1 false)
  ret void
}
```
After InstCombine, the last memcpy is dropped as the source buffer is uninitialized (filled with undef (in llvm)/poison (in alive2)).

Should we adjust `initializes` to only account for writing with well-defined values?
Generated with rustlantis + llubi.
Original rust mir program: https://gist.github.com/dtcxzyw/78250ce921833ea20c5cb040d29f1a3f

cc @haopliu @nikic

## Comments

### Comment 1 - haopliu

> After InstCombine, the last memcpy is dropped

Would this change trigger another `FunctionAttrs` run that will update the `initializes` attribute according to the new IR?

cc @jvoung @aeubanks 

---

### Comment 2 - dtcxzyw

> Would this change trigger another FunctionAttrs run that will update the initializes attribute according to the new IR?

It is impractical. We should make sure that InstCombine performs a valid refinement.


---

### Comment 3 - aeubanks

Reduced: https://alive2.llvm.org/ce/z/ahKwC-

```
define void @src(ptr initializes((0, 1)) %0) {
  %2 = alloca i8
  call void @llvm.memcpy.p0.p0.i64(ptr %0, ptr %2, i64 1, i1 false)
  ret void
}
```

Instcombine removes the memcpy. I don't see what's wrong with this. It's ok for instcombine to remove the memcpy since anything is at least as defined as poison. The caller cannot assume that contents of the memory are anything other than poison after `@src`, but in `@src` we don't actually have to do the memcpy.

@nunoplopes 

---

### Comment 4 - nikic

@aeubanks The InstCombine transform is (intended to be) valid, the problem here is just with the spec wording for the initializes attribute.

> Should we adjust `initializes` to only account for writing with well-defined values?

No. "Initializing" with uninitialized memory is fine for the purposes of this attribute.

The elegant way to specify the semantics operationally would be analogous to how we specify writable: `initializes((Lo, Hi))` writes the bytes `(Lo, Hi)` with undef at the entry of the function. This justifies both DSE (can remove a write before an undef write) and inference (can insert an undef write before a write), while still allowing this InstCombine transform (can remove an undef write after an undef write).

Unfortunately, it's not as simple as this, because we can't just say the undef write happens at the entry of the function. initializes only wants to guarantee that "initialization" happens at some point on the path to a normal return. It may be omitted on paths that unwind or diverge.

So I think the way to reconcile this would be to essentially keep the current spec, but add that any byte range that is part of initializes but has not been written at the point of return is written with undef then.

---

### Comment 5 - nikic

See also https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/133038 for a related issue. If I take these two together, a way to address both would be:

 * If a byte that is part of initializes is stored, mark it as "initialized".
 * If a byte that is part of initializes is loaded, and the byte is not marked as "initialized", return undef. Otherwise perform a normal load.
 * If the function returns, write undef to all bytes that are part of initializes and not marked as "initialized".

---

### Comment 6 - dtcxzyw

> See also [#133038](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/133038) for a related issue. If I take these two together, a way to address both would be:
> 
> * If a byte that is part of initializes is stored, mark it as "initialized".
> * If a byte that is part of initializes is loaded, and the byte is not marked as "initialized", return undef. Otherwise perform a normal load.
> * If the function returns, write undef to all bytes that are part of initializes and not marked as "initialized".

I am fine with this solution.


---

