# clang frontend command failed with exit code 135

**Author:** urvangjoshi
**URL:** https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/163284
**Status:** Closed
**Labels:** clang:frontend, crash
**Closed Date:** 2025-10-27T15:34:53Z

## Body

For our project AVM (https://gitlab.com/AOMediaCodec/avm),  we build using `clang` with different  sanitizers enabled as part of the Gitlab CI.

Recently, we have noticed that `clang` occasionally crashes with this type of error message:

```
clang: error: clang frontend command failed with exit code 135 (use -v to see invocation)
clang version 18.1.8 (https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project 3b5b5c1ec4a3095ab096dd780e84d7ab81f3d7ff)
Target: x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu
Thread model: posix
InstalledDir: /usr/lib/llvm-18/bin
clang: note: diagnostic msg: 
********************
PLEASE ATTACH THE FOLLOWING FILES TO THE BUG REPORT:
Preprocessed source(s) and associated run script(s) are located at:
clang: note: diagnostic msg: /tmp/av1_config-260c0e.c
clang: note: diagnostic msg: /tmp/av1_config-260c0e.sh
clang: note: diagnostic msg: 
********************
```

Example log: https://gitlab.com/AOMediaCodec/avm/-/jobs/11702400258
(The compilation enabled `Thread` sanitizer in this case -- but transient errors have occurred for other sanitizers like `address` or `undefined` as well).

Attaching:
- The 2 diagnostic files generated by clang.
- The full log from the link above (in case link is not accessible / expires).

Pls let me know if any additional information will help.

[clang_crash_artifacts.zip](https://github.com/user-attachments/files/22893797/clang_crash_artifacts.zip)

[clang_crash.log.txt](https://github.com/user-attachments/files/22893799/clang_crash.log.txt)

## Comments

### Comment 1 - llvmbot


@llvm/issue-subscribers-clang-frontend

Author: None (urvangjoshi)

<details>
For our project AVM (https://gitlab.com/AOMediaCodec/avm),  we build using `clang` with different  sanitizers enabled as part of the Gitlab CI.

Recently, we have noticed that `clang` occasionally crashes with this type of error message:

```
clang: error: clang frontend command failed with exit code 135 (use -v to see invocation)
clang version 18.1.8 (https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project 3b5b5c1ec4a3095ab096dd780e84d7ab81f3d7ff)
Target: x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu
Thread model: posix
InstalledDir: /usr/lib/llvm-18/bin
clang: note: diagnostic msg: 
********************
PLEASE ATTACH THE FOLLOWING FILES TO THE BUG REPORT:
Preprocessed source(s) and associated run script(s) are located at:
clang: note: diagnostic msg: /tmp/av1_config-260c0e.c
clang: note: diagnostic msg: /tmp/av1_config-260c0e.sh
clang: note: diagnostic msg: 
********************
```

Example log: https://gitlab.com/AOMediaCodec/avm/-/jobs/11702400258
(The compilation enabled `Thread` sanitizer in this case -- but transient errors have occurred for other sanitizers like `address` or `undefined` as well).

Attaching:
- The 2 diagnostic files generated by clang.
- The full log from the link above (in case link is not accessible / expires).

Pls let me know if any additional information will help.

[clang_crash_artifacts.zip](https://github.com/user-attachments/files/22893797/clang_crash_artifacts.zip)

[clang_crash.log.txt](https://github.com/user-attachments/files/22893799/clang_crash.log.txt)
</details>


---

### Comment 2 - EugeneZelenko

Could you please try 21 or `main` branch? Only most recent release is maintained.

---

### Comment 3 - urvangjoshi

Hi Eugene, thanks for your reply.
I wish it was straightforward to test with the latest version, but it's tricky due to a few reasons:

(1) We are only observing the issue on Gitlab CI -- and it happens occasionally (NOT consistently).  We haven't been able to reproduce it on a local machine -- even with the exact same docker image.
So, not sure how to test locally if an updated version fixes the issue.

(2) For Gitlab CI itself, we are using a docker image with Ubuntu 24.04 LTS.  So, we can only use certain LLVM/clang toolchains on it -- the versions beyond 18 are not available there.
This makes us difficult to upgrade the version on the docker image itself (and therefore Gitlab CI).

Let me ask a different question:   based on the diagnostic report,  is there any indication of which exact line of code is causing the crash?
If so, perhaps we can do some workaround for that code to avoid this issue.

---

### Comment 4 - efriedma-quic

> For Gitlab CI itself, we are using a docker image with Ubuntu 24.04 LTS. So, we can only use certain LLVM/clang toolchains on it 

You can download newer versions from https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/releases/ .

> Let me ask a different question: based on the diagnostic report, is there any indication of which exact line of code is causing the crash?

From the log:

> /builds/AOMediaCodec/avm/av1/common/restoration.h:828:75: parsing function body 'get_ru_index_for_tile_start'

---

### Comment 5 - urvangjoshi

We found one issue with the build (in our project) -- fixing which seems to be avoiding this issue so far.
Not sure if that is the root cause -- but I'll close this issue for now.

---

